Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
If you want more labs like this, I highly
recommend Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.
NetSim is a network simulator like Packet
Tracer, but it’s far more powerful and contains
over 100 detailed guided labs covering the
CCNA exam topics.
If you want to get NetSim, follow the link
in the description.
In this video we’ll configure port security
on SW1 and SW2.
We’ll configure it on SW1’s interfaces
connected to the PCs, and on SW2’s G0/1
interface, connected to SW1.
Some of the commands I introduced in the lecture
video aren’t supported in packet tracer,
but the most important ones are.
So, first let’s configure SW1.
On the F0/1, 2, and 3 interfaces we’ll enable
port security with the shutdown violation
mode, 1 MAC address allowed, sticky learning
disabled, and an aging time of 1 hour.
ENABLE.
CONF T. The port security configuration of
each interface will be the same, so let’s
do INTERFACE RANGE F0/1 – 3.
By default, the violation mode is shutdown,
and the maximum number of MAC addresses allowed
is also 1.
Sticky MAC address learning is also disabled
by default, so we don’t have to configure
any of those.
Let’s just set the aging time to 1 hour.
With the default time of 0 minutes, secure
MAC addresses will never age out.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY AGING TIME, and then
enter the time in minutes, 60.
Now, port security itself isn’t actually
enabled yet, so I’ll enable it.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY.
But the command is rejected, a common mistake
when configuring port security.
These interfaces have the default administrative
mode of DYNAMIC AUTO.
Let’s check one of them.
DO SHOW INTERFACES F0/1 SWITCHPORT.
Up here you can see it, administrative mode
dynamic auto.
To enable port security, the interface must
be manually configured as an access port or
trunk port.
So, SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
Now let’s try again.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY.
Okay, it should be enabled.
I’ll check one of the interfaces.
DO SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE F0/1.
Okay, port security is enabled and the default
setting of the violation mode is shutdown.
The aging time of 60 minutes I configured
is shown here.
That’s all we need to configure on SW1.
So let’s move on to SW2.
We’ll configure port security on G0/1 with
the Restrict violation mode, a maximum of
4 addresses, and sticky MAC address learning
enabled.
Why 4 addresses, even though there are only
3 PCs in the network currently?
It’s because SW2 will be receiving CDP messages
from SW1, so it will learn SW1’s MAC address
too.
Okay, let’s configure it.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE G0/1.
The default port security violation mode is
shutdown, so let’s configure restrict mode.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY VIOLATION RESTRICT.
And then the maximum number of addresses.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAXIMUM 4.
And then enable sticky MAC address learning.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAC-ADDRESS STICKY.
Finally let’s enable port security.
There is only 1 VLAN in the network, VLAN
1, so I’ll just configure G0/1 as an access
port, although trunk is an option too.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
Now I’ll enable port security.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY.
Okay, let’s check those settings.
DO SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE G0/1.
Okay, port security is enabled, the violation
mode is restrict, and the maximum number of
addresses is 4.
As for sticky learning, we’ll test that
now.
I’ll ping from each PC to R1 so that SW1
and SW2 can learn their MAC addresses.
PC1 first.
PING 10.0.0.254.
Okay, then PC2.
And finally PC3.
PING 10.0.0.254.
Okay, now let’s check on SW2.
DO SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE G0/1.
So, the total MAC addresses learned is 4,
PCs 1, 2, 3, and SW1.
And all 4 of those MAC addresses are sticky.
Let’s check the config of G0/1.
DO SHOW RUN.
Scroll down to G0/1, and here we can see the
MAC addresses of PC1, PC2, PC3, and this one
here must be SW1.
And let’s check the MAC address table.
DO SHOW MAC ADDRESS-TABLE.
Okay, there are the same 4 MAC addresses.
Notice the type of STATIC, even though they
were dynamically learned.
That’s because of sticky learning.
And one more command, DO SHOW PORT-SECURITY.
So, G0/1 has a maximum of 4 secure MAC addresses,
it currently has learned 4, there are 0 security
violations, and the security action is restrict.
Now let’s trigger some violations and see
what happens.
First, I’ll trigger a violation on SW2.
To do that, I’ll go on SW1 and configure
the VLAN 1 SVI.
INTERFACE VLAN1.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.10 255.255.255.0.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, so if SW1 tries to ping R1, the source
MAC address will be the MAC address of the
VLAN 1 SVI.
SW2 learned the MAC address of SW1’s G0/1
interface, but it doesn’t know the MAC address
of the VLAN 1 SVI.
So let’s try that ping.
DO PING 10.0.0.254.
Okay, the ping isn’t working.
That’s because SW2 is blocking the pings
because of the unauthorized source MAC address.
Let’s check on SW2.
DO SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE G0/1.
Okay, notice the port status is still secure-up,
but the violation counter has been incremented.
There haven’t been any syslog messages,
that might be an issue with packet tracer.
By default, a syslog message should be displayed
in the console.
Anyway, that’s the restrict mode.
Now let’s trigger a violation on SW1.
To do that, I’ll change the MAC address
of PC1.
To do that in packet tracer, go to the config
tab of PC1, click on FastEthernet0, and then
change the MAC address here.
I’ll change the last ‘1’ to an ‘A’.
And let’s try to ping R1.
PING 10.0.0.254.
Okay, it doesn’t work this time.
Let’s take a look on SW1.
Okay, here syslog messages have been shown
for the F0/1 interface being shutdown, but
no actual port security related syslog messages.
Anyway, let’s check the interface.
DO SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE F0/1.
Okay, the state is secure-shutdown, and the
security violation count is 1.
Now, errdisable recovery isn’t available
in packet tracer so if you want to re-enable
the interface, you’ll need to do it manually.
Anyway, in this lab we did some basic port
security configurations and observed how the
shutdown and restrict violation modes work.
That’s all for this lab.
Next, let’s take a look at a bonus lab in
Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.